mojo/docs/manual/pointers/index.mdx, before:

---
title: Intro to pointers
sidebar_position: 1
description: An overview of accessing memory using Mojo's pointer types.
---

A pointer is an indirect reference to one or more values stored in memory. The
pointer is a value that holds an address to memory, and provides APIs to store
and retrieve values to that memory. The value pointed to by a pointer is also
known as a _pointee_.

The Mojo standard library includes several types of pointers, which provide
different sets of features. All of these pointer types are _generic_—they can
point to any type of value, and the value type is specified as a parameter. For
example, the following code creates an `OwnedPointer` that points to an `Int`
value:

```mojo
var ptr: OwnedPointer[Int]
ptr = OwnedPointer(100)
```

The `ptr` variable has a value of type `OwnedPointer[Int]`. The pointer *points
to* a value of type `Int`, as shown in Figure 1.


<figure>

![](../images/owned-pointer-diagram.png#light)
![](../images/owned-pointer-diagram-dark.png#dark)

<figcaption><b>Figure 1.</b> Pointer and pointee</figcaption>
</figure>

Accessing the memory—to retrieve or update a value—is called
_dereferencing_ the pointer. You can dereference a pointer by following the
variable name with an empty pair of square brackets:

```mojo
# Update an initialized value
ptr[] += 10
# Access an initialized value
print(ptr[])
```

## Pointer terminology

Before we jump into the pointer types, here are a few terms you'll run across. Some
of them may already be familiar to you.

- **Safe pointers**: are designed to prevent memory errors. Unless you use one
  of the APIs that are specially designated as unsafe, you can use these
  pointers without worrying about memory issues like double-free or
  use-after-free.

- **Nullable pointers**: can point to an invalid memory location (typically 0,
or a “null pointer”). Safe pointers aren't nullable.

- **Smart pointers**: own their pointees, which means that the value they point
  to may be deallocated when the pointer itself is destroyed. Non-owning
  pointers may point to values owned elsewhere, or may require some manual
  management of the value lifecycle.

- **Memory allocation**: some pointer types can allocate memory to store their
  pointees, while other pointers can only point to pre-existing values. Memory
  allocation can either be implicit (that is, performed automatically when
  initializing a pointer with a value) or explicit.

- **Uninitialized memory**: refers to memory locations that haven't been
  initialized with a value, which may therefore contain random data.
  Newly-allocated memory is uninitialized. The safe pointer types don't allow
  users to access memory that's uninitialized. Unsafe pointers can allocate a
  block of uninitialized memory locations and then initialize them one at a time.
  Being able to access uninitialized memory is unsafe by definition.

- **Copyable types**: can be copied implicitly (for example, by assigning a
  value to a variable). Also called *implicitly copyable types*.

  ```mojo
  copied_ptr = ptr
  ```

  *Explicitly copyable* types require the user to request a copy, using a
    constructor with a keyword argument:

  ```mojo
  copied_owned_ptr = OwnedPointer(other=owned_ptr)
  ```

## Pointer types

The Mojo standard library includes several pointer types with different
characteristics:

- [`Pointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/pointer/Pointer) is a safe pointer that points
  to a single value that it doesn't own.

- [`OwnedPointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/owned_pointer/OwnedPointer) is a smart
  pointer that points to a single value, and maintains exclusive ownership of
  that value.

- [`ArcPointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/arc/ArcPointer) is a reference-counted
  smart pointer that points to an owned value with ownership potentially shared
  with other instances of `ArcPointer`.

- [`UnsafePointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer) points to
  one or more consecutive memory locations, and can refer to uninitialized
  memory.

Table 1 summarizes the different types of pointers:

<figure>

|  | `Pointer` | `OwnedPointer` | `ArcPointer` | `UnsafePointer` |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Safe | Yes | Yes | Yes | No |
| Allocates memory | No | Implicitly <sup>1</sup> | Implicitly <sup>1</sup> | Explicitly |
| Owns pointee(s) | No | Yes | Yes | No <sup>2</sup> |
| Copyable | Yes | No <sup>3</sup> | Yes | Yes |
| Nullable | No | No | No | Yes |
| Can point to uninitialized memory | No | No | No | Yes |
| Can point to multiple values (array-like access) | No | No | No | Yes |

<figcaption><b>Table 1.</b> Pointer types</figcaption>
</figure>

<sup>1</sup> `OwnedPointer` and `ArcPointer` implicitly allocate memory when you
initialize the pointer with a value.

<sup>2</sup> `UnsafePointer` provides unsafe methods for initializing and
destroying instances of the stored type. The user is responsible for managing
the lifecycle of stored values.

<sup>3</sup> `OwnedPointer` is explicitly copyable, but explicitly copying an
`OwnedPointer` copies the *stored value* into a new `OwnedPointer`.

The following sections provide more details on each pointer type.

## `Pointer`

The [`Pointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/pointer/Pointer) type is a safe pointer that
points to a initialized value that it doesn't own. Some example use cases for a
`Pointer` include:

- Storing a reference to a related type. For example, a list's iterator object
might hold a `Pointer` back to the original list.

- Passing the memory location for a single value to external code via
`external_call()`.

- Where you need an API to return a long-lived reference to a value. (Currently
the iterators for standard library collection types like `List` return
pointers.)

You can construct a `Pointer` using the `address_of()` static method:

```python
ptr = Pointer(to=some_value)
```

You can also create a `Pointer` by copying an existing `Pointer`.

A `Pointer` carries an [`origin`](/mojo/manual/values/lifetimes) for the stored
value, so Mojo can track the lifetime of the referenced value.

## `OwnedPointer`

The [`OwnedPointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/owned_pointer/OwnedPointer) type is a
smart pointer designed for cases where there is single ownership of the
underlying data. An `OwnedPointer` points to a single item, which is passed in
when you initialize the `OwnedPointer`. The `OwnedPointer` allocates memory and
moves or copies the value into the reserved memory.

```python
o_ptr = OwnedPointer(some_big_struct)
```

An owned pointer can hold almost any type of item, but the stored item must be
either `Movable`, `Copyable`, or `ExplicitlyCopyable`.

Since an `OwnedPointer` is designed to enforce single ownership, the pointer
itself can be moved, but not copied.

Note: Currently, you can't create an `Optional[OwnedPointer[T]]` because the
`Optional` type only works with types that are both movable and copyable. This
restricts some use cases that would otherwise be a natural fit
for`OwnedPointer`, including self-referential data structures like linked lists
and trees. (Until this use case is supported for `OwnedPointer`, it's possible
to use`ArcPointer` where you need a smart pointer that can be `Optional`.)

## `ArcPointer`

An [`ArcPointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/arc/ArcPointer) is a reference-counted
smart pointer, ideal for shared resources where the last owner for a given value
may not be clear. Like an `OwnedPointer`, it points to a single value, and it
allocates memory when you initialize the `ArcPointer` with a value:

```python
attributesDict = Dict[String, String]()
attributes = ArcPointer(attributesDict)
```

Unlike an `OwnedPointer`, an `ArcPointer` can be freely copied. All instances
of a given `ArcPointer` share a reference count, which is incremented whenever
the `ArcPointer` is copied and decremented whenever an instance is destroyed.
When the reference count reaches zero, the stored value is destroyed and the
allocated memory is freed.

You can use `ArcPointer` to implement safe reference-semantic types. For
example, in the following code snippet `SharedDict` uses an `ArcPointer` to
store a dictionary. Copying an instance of `SharedDict` only copies the
`ArcPointer`, not the dictionary, which is shared between all of the copies.

```python
from memory import ArcPointer
from collections import Dict

struct SharedDict:
    var attributes: ArcPointer[Dict[String, String]]

    fn __init__(out self):
        attributesDict = Dict[String, String]()
        self.attributes = ArcPointer(attributesDict)

    fn __copyinit__(out self, other: Self):
        self.attributes = other.attributes

    def __setitem__(inout self, key: String, value: String):
        self.attributes[][key] = value

    def __getitem__(self, key: String) -> String:
        return self.attributes[].get(key, default="")

def main():
    thing1 = SharedDict()
    thing2 = thing1
    thing1["Flip"] = "Flop"
    print(thing2["Flip"])
```

Note: The reference count is stored using an
[`Atomic`]([/mojo/stdlib/os/atomic/Atomic](https://docs.modular-staging.com/mojo/stdlib/os/atomic/Atomic))
value to ensure that updates to the reference count are thread-safe. However,
Mojo doesn't currently enforce exclusive access across thread boundaries, so
it's possible to form race conditions.

## UnsafePointer

[`UnsafePointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer) is a
low-level pointer that can access a block of contiguous memory locations, which
might be uninitialized. It's analogous to a raw pointer in the C and C++
programming languages. `UnsafePointer` provides unsafe methods for initializing
and destroying stored values, as well as for accessing the values once they're
initialized.

As the name suggests, `UnsafePointer` doesn't provide any memory safety
guarantees, so you should reserve it for cases when none of the other pointer
types will do the job. Here are some use cases where you might want to use an
`UnsafePointer`:

- Building a high-performance array-like structure, such as `List` or `Tensor`.
  A single `UnsafePointer` can access many values, and gives you a lot of
  control over how you allocate, use, and deallocate memory. Being able to
  access uninitialized memory means that you can preallocate a block of memory,
  and initialize values incrementally as they are added to the collection.

- Interacting with external libraries including C++ and Python. You can
  use`UnsafePointer` to pass a buffer full of data to or from an external
  library.

For more information, see [Unsafe
pointers](/mojo/manual/pointers/unsafe-pointers).

Commit message:

[Docs] Remove address_of() from Pointer docs.
Also add notes about unsafe pointers and origins.

MODULAR_ORIG_COMMIT_REV_ID: fb9c11181bc74a96107aed6ccbdf7228357d303a

mojo/docs/manual/pointers/index.mdx, after:

---
title: Intro to pointers
sidebar_position: 1
description: An overview of accessing memory using Mojo's pointer types.
---

A pointer is an indirect reference to one or more values stored in memory. The
pointer is a value that holds an address to memory, and provides APIs to store
and retrieve values to that memory. The value pointed to by a pointer is also
known as a _pointee_.

The Mojo standard library includes several types of pointers, which provide
different sets of features. All of these pointer types are _generic_—they can
point to any type of value, and the value type is specified as a parameter. For
example, the following code creates an `OwnedPointer` that points to an `Int`
value:

```mojo
var ptr: OwnedPointer[Int]
ptr = OwnedPointer(100)
```

The `ptr` variable has a value of type `OwnedPointer[Int]`. The pointer *points
to* a value of type `Int`, as shown in Figure 1.


<figure>

![](../images/owned-pointer-diagram.png#light)
![](../images/owned-pointer-diagram-dark.png#dark)

<figcaption><b>Figure 1.</b> Pointer and pointee</figcaption>
</figure>

Accessing the memory—to retrieve or update a value—is called
_dereferencing_ the pointer. You can dereference a pointer by following the
variable name with an empty pair of square brackets:

```mojo
# Update an initialized value
ptr[] += 10
# Access an initialized value
print(ptr[])
```

## Pointer terminology

Before we jump into the pointer types, here are a few terms you'll run across. Some
of them may already be familiar to you.

- **Safe pointers**: are designed to prevent memory errors. Unless you use one
  of the APIs that are specially designated as unsafe, you can use these
  pointers without worrying about memory issues like double-free or
  use-after-free.

- **Nullable pointers**: can point to an invalid memory location (typically 0,
or a “null pointer”). Safe pointers aren't nullable.

- **Smart pointers**: own their pointees, which means that the value they point
  to may be deallocated when the pointer itself is destroyed. Non-owning
  pointers may point to values owned elsewhere, or may require some manual
  management of the value lifecycle.

- **Memory allocation**: some pointer types can allocate memory to store their
  pointees, while other pointers can only point to pre-existing values. Memory
  allocation can either be implicit (that is, performed automatically when
  initializing a pointer with a value) or explicit.

- **Uninitialized memory**: refers to memory locations that haven't been
  initialized with a value, which may therefore contain random data.
  Newly-allocated memory is uninitialized. The safe pointer types don't allow
  users to access memory that's uninitialized. Unsafe pointers can allocate a
  block of uninitialized memory locations and then initialize them one at a time.
  Being able to access uninitialized memory is unsafe by definition.

- **Copyable types**: can be copied implicitly (for example, by assigning a
  value to a variable). Also called *implicitly copyable types*.

  ```mojo
  copied_ptr = ptr
  ```

  *Explicitly copyable* types require the user to request a copy, using a
    constructor with a keyword argument:

  ```mojo
  copied_owned_ptr = OwnedPointer(other=owned_ptr)
  ```

## Pointer types

The Mojo standard library includes several pointer types with different
characteristics:

- [`Pointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/pointer/Pointer) is a safe pointer that points
  to a single value that it doesn't own.

- [`OwnedPointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/owned_pointer/OwnedPointer) is a smart
  pointer that points to a single value, and maintains exclusive ownership of
  that value.

- [`ArcPointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/arc/ArcPointer) is a reference-counted
  smart pointer that points to an owned value with ownership potentially shared
  with other instances of `ArcPointer`.

- [`UnsafePointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer) points to
  one or more consecutive memory locations, and can refer to uninitialized
  memory.

Table 1 summarizes the different types of pointers:

<figure>

|  | `Pointer` | `OwnedPointer` | `ArcPointer` | `UnsafePointer` |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Safe | Yes | Yes | Yes | No |
| Allocates memory | No | Implicitly <sup>1</sup> | Implicitly <sup>1</sup> | Explicitly |
| Owns pointee(s) | No | Yes | Yes | No <sup>2</sup> |
| Copyable | Yes | No <sup>3</sup> | Yes | Yes |
| Nullable | No | No | No | Yes |
| Can point to uninitialized memory | No | No | No | Yes |
| Can point to multiple values (array-like access) | No | No | No | Yes |

<figcaption><b>Table 1.</b> Pointer types</figcaption>
</figure>

<sup>1</sup> `OwnedPointer` and `ArcPointer` implicitly allocate memory when you
initialize the pointer with a value.

<sup>2</sup> `UnsafePointer` provides unsafe methods for initializing and
destroying instances of the stored type. The user is responsible for managing
the lifecycle of stored values.

<sup>3</sup> `OwnedPointer` is explicitly copyable, but explicitly copying an
`OwnedPointer` copies the *stored value* into a new `OwnedPointer`.

The following sections provide more details on each pointer type.

## `Pointer`

The [`Pointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/pointer/Pointer) type is a safe pointer that
points to a initialized value that it doesn't own. Some example use cases for a
`Pointer` include:

- Storing a reference to a related type. For example, a list's iterator object
might hold a `Pointer` back to the original list.

- Passing the memory location for a single value to external code via
`external_call()`.

- Where you need an API to return a long-lived reference to a value. (Currently
the iterators for standard library collection types like `List` return
pointers.)

You can construct a `Pointer` to an existing value by calling the constructor
with the `to` keyword argument:

```python
ptr = Pointer(to=some_value)
```

You can also create a `Pointer` by copying an existing `Pointer`.

A `Pointer` carries an [`origin`](/mojo/manual/values/lifetimes) for the stored
value, so Mojo can track the lifetime of the referenced value.

## `OwnedPointer`

The [`OwnedPointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/owned_pointer/OwnedPointer) type is a
smart pointer designed for cases where there is single ownership of the
underlying data. An `OwnedPointer` points to a single item, which is passed in
when you initialize the `OwnedPointer`. The `OwnedPointer` allocates memory and
moves or copies the value into the reserved memory.

```python
o_ptr = OwnedPointer(some_big_struct)
```

An owned pointer can hold almost any type of item, but the stored item must be
either `Movable`, `Copyable`, or `ExplicitlyCopyable`.

Since an `OwnedPointer` is designed to enforce single ownership, the pointer
itself can be moved, but not copied.

Note: Currently, you can't create an `Optional[OwnedPointer[T]]` because the
`Optional` type only works with types that are both movable and copyable. This
restricts some use cases that would otherwise be a natural fit
for`OwnedPointer`, including self-referential data structures like linked lists
and trees. (Until this use case is supported for `OwnedPointer`, it's possible
to use`ArcPointer` where you need a smart pointer that can be `Optional`.)

## `ArcPointer`

An [`ArcPointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/arc/ArcPointer) is a reference-counted
smart pointer, ideal for shared resources where the last owner for a given value
may not be clear. Like an `OwnedPointer`, it points to a single value, and it
allocates memory when you initialize the `ArcPointer` with a value:

```python
attributesDict = Dict[String, String]()
attributes = ArcPointer(attributesDict)
```

Unlike an `OwnedPointer`, an `ArcPointer` can be freely copied. All instances
of a given `ArcPointer` share a reference count, which is incremented whenever
the `ArcPointer` is copied and decremented whenever an instance is destroyed.
When the reference count reaches zero, the stored value is destroyed and the
allocated memory is freed.

You can use `ArcPointer` to implement safe reference-semantic types. For
example, in the following code snippet `SharedDict` uses an `ArcPointer` to
store a dictionary. Copying an instance of `SharedDict` only copies the
`ArcPointer`, not the dictionary, which is shared between all of the copies.

```python
from memory import ArcPointer
from collections import Dict

struct SharedDict:
    var attributes: ArcPointer[Dict[String, String]]

    fn __init__(out self):
        attributesDict = Dict[String, String]()
        self.attributes = ArcPointer(attributesDict)

    fn __copyinit__(out self, other: Self):
        self.attributes = other.attributes

    def __setitem__(inout self, key: String, value: String):
        self.attributes[][key] = value

    def __getitem__(self, key: String) -> String:
        return self.attributes[].get(key, default="")

def main():
    thing1 = SharedDict()
    thing2 = thing1
    thing1["Flip"] = "Flop"
    print(thing2["Flip"])
```

Note: The reference count is stored using an
[`Atomic`](/mojo/stdlib/os/atomic/Atomic)
value to ensure that updates to the reference count are thread-safe. However,
Mojo doesn't currently enforce exclusive access across thread boundaries, so
it's possible to form race conditions.

## UnsafePointer

[`UnsafePointer`](/mojo/stdlib/memory/unsafe_pointer/UnsafePointer) is a
low-level pointer that can access a block of contiguous memory locations, which
might be uninitialized. It's analogous to a raw pointer in the C and C++
programming languages. `UnsafePointer` provides unsafe methods for initializing
and destroying stored values, as well as for accessing the values once they're
initialized.

As the name suggests, `UnsafePointer` doesn't provide any memory safety
guarantees, so you should reserve it for cases when none of the other pointer
types will do the job. Here are some use cases where you might want to use an
`UnsafePointer`:

- Building a high-performance array-like structure, such as `List` or `Tensor`.
  A single `UnsafePointer` can access many values, and gives you a lot of
  control over how you allocate, use, and deallocate memory. Being able to
  access uninitialized memory means that you can preallocate a block of memory,
  and initialize values incrementally as they are added to the collection.

- Interacting with external libraries including C++ and Python. You can
  use`UnsafePointer` to pass a buffer full of data to or from an external
  library.

For more information, see [Unsafe
pointers](/mojo/manual/pointers/unsafe-pointers).
