mojo/proposals/collection-literal-design.md, before:

# Collection Literal Design

Date: May 18, 2025
Status: Partially Implemented

This doc describes the design and behavior of collection literals in Mojo. It is
intended to explain how types can work with collection literals and how corner
cases are handled in one end-to-end place. It does not go into the design
details of specific collections like `List` or `Dict`.

## Background

Mojo inherits ergonomic collection literals from Python, for example, we want
things like this to work as a python programmer would expect:

```mojo
    mylist = [1, 2, 3]
    assert(mylist[1] == 2)

    myset = {1, 2, 3}
    assert(2 in myset)

    mydict = {"foo": 1, "bar": 2}
    assert(mydict["foo"] == 1)
```

Mojo has `List` and `Set` and `Dict` collection types, but we need to wire up
the collection literal syntax to work with these properly.

While we want collection literals to default to the standard library types, we
also want collection literals to work with other types as well. This is because
we want to enable specialized collections, e.g. lists that contain elements
inline, dictionaries specialized for string keys, and we also want to
interoperate well with Python.

```mojo
fn take_inline_array(arr: InlineArray[Int, 18]): ...
fn take_python(obj: PythonObject): ...

fn example():
    # This should form an InlineArray directly. It shouldn't create a List and
    # copy it.
    take_inline_array([1, 2, 3]) 

    # This should pass a python list with python integers, string, set and dict
    # inside of it.
    take_python([1, "str", {2, 3, 4}, {"foo": 1, "bar": 2}])
```

This gives us the power of easy of use of ergonomic defaults, while also
enabling the construction of efficient datatypes and interoperability with
existing APIs.

## List literals

In order to support list literal syntax, a type implements an initializer that
takes a `__list_literal__: ()` argument - an argument of empty-tuple type.  The
empty tuple ensures that this overload won't be picked accidentally, because
some types may need to support multiple literals (e.g. `PythonObject` needs to
support set literals and list literals, and the initializers do different
things.  For example, `List` has this initializer:

```mojo
struct List[T: Copyable & Movable, hint_trivial_type: Bool = False](...):
     fn __init__(out self, owned *values: T, __list_literal__: () = ()):
        """Constructs a list from the given values.
        ...
```

This allows `List` to be built from a list literal, and because the
`__list_literal__` has a default value, you can also use the same initializer
with explicit syntax like `List[Int](1, 2, 3)` if you'd like.

While it is conventional to define this initializer with a variadic, this isn't
required:

```mojo
# A type that allows initializers with 2 or 3 integers only.
struct TwoAndThreeList:
   fn __init__(out self, a: Int, b: Int, __list_literal__: ()): pass
   fn __init__(out self, a: Int, b: Int, c: Int, __list_literal__: ()): pass

fn test():
  # These are ok.
  var a: TwoAndThreeList = [1, 2]
  var b: TwoAndThreeList = [1, 2, 3]

  # Error: no matching function in initialization
  var c: TwoAndThreeList = [1, 2, 3, 4]
```

Similarly, you can also define things that take heterogenous types:

```mojo
struct StringIntListLiteral:
   fn __init__(out self, a: String, b: Int, __list_literal__: ()): pass

fn test():
  # Weird but accepted.
  var a: StringIntListLiteral = ["foo", 2]
```

While this is possible, this isn't something you should actually do.  The reason
that this is important to support is `PythonObject` which takes a heterogenous
collection of values that conform to `PythonConvertible`.

### Defaulting rule

If Mojo knows the contextual type for a literal, it will impose use that type to
construct the literal.  Otherwise it will default to the standard library `List`
type defined in the collections package.

## Set literals

TODO.

## Dictionary literals

TODO.

## Initializer lists

TODO.

Commit message:

[mojo-lang] Implement support for dictionary literals
This implements compiler support for dictionary literal code generation
as described in the design doc. It also adopts this in the standard
library `Dict` type.

MODULAR_ORIG_COMMIT_REV_ID: 8e887e45bf540a3765a88f1f5a1b847f1f665676

mojo/proposals/collection-literal-design.md, after:

# Collection Literal Design

Date: May 18, 2025
Status: Partially Implemented

This doc describes the design and behavior of collection literals in Mojo. It is
intended to explain how types can work with collection literals and how corner
cases are handled in one end-to-end place. It does not go into the design
details of specific collections like `List` or `Dict`.

## Background

Mojo inherits ergonomic collection literals from Python, for example, we want
things like this to work as a python programmer would expect:

```mojo
    mylist = [1, 2, 3]
    assert(mylist[1] == 2)

    myset = {1, 2, 3}
    assert(2 in myset)

    mydict = {"foo": 1, "bar": 2}
    assert(mydict["foo"] == 1)
```

Mojo has `List` and `Set` and `Dict` collection types, but we need to wire up
the collection literal syntax to work with these properly.

While we want collection literals to default to the standard library types, we
also want collection literals to work with other types as well. This is because
we want to enable specialized collections, e.g. lists that contain elements
inline, dictionaries specialized for string keys, and we also want to
interoperate well with Python.

```mojo
fn take_inline_array(arr: InlineArray[Int, 18]): ...
fn take_python(obj: PythonObject): ...

fn example():
    # This should form an InlineArray directly. It shouldn't create a List and
    # copy it.
    take_inline_array([1, 2, 3]) 

    # This should pass a python list with python integers, string, set and dict
    # inside of it.
    take_python([1, "str", {2, 3, 4}, {"foo": 1, "bar": 2}])
```

This gives us the power of easy of use of ergonomic defaults, while also
enabling the construction of efficient datatypes and interoperability with
existing APIs.

## Defaulting rule

If Mojo knows the contextual type for a collection literal, it will use that
type to construct the literal.  Otherwise it will default to the corresponding
standard library type defined in the collections package: `List`, `Set`, `Dict`
etc.

## List literals

In order to support list literal syntax, a type implements an initializer that
takes a `__list_literal__: ()` argument - an argument of empty-tuple type.  The
empty tuple ensures that this overload won't be picked accidentally, because
some types may need to support multiple literals (e.g. `PythonObject` needs to
support set literals and list literals, and the initializers do different
things.  For example, `List` has this initializer:

```mojo
struct List[T: Copyable & Movable, hint_trivial_type: Bool = False](...):
     fn __init__(out self, owned *values: T, __list_literal__: () = ()):
        """Constructs a list from the given values.
        ...
```

This allows `List` to be built from a list literal, and because the
`__list_literal__` has a default value, you can also use the same initializer
with explicit syntax like `List[Int](1, 2, 3)` if you'd like.

While it is conventional to define this initializer with a variadic, this isn't
required:

```mojo
# A type that allows initializers with 2 or 3 integers only.
struct TwoAndThreeList:
   fn __init__(out self, a: Int, b: Int, __list_literal__: ()): pass
   fn __init__(out self, a: Int, b: Int, c: Int, __list_literal__: ()): pass

fn test():
  # These are ok.
  var a: TwoAndThreeList = [1, 2]
  var b: TwoAndThreeList = [1, 2, 3]

  # Error: no matching function in initialization
  var c: TwoAndThreeList = [1, 2, 3, 4]
```

Similarly, you can also define things that take heterogenous types:

```mojo
struct StringIntListLiteral:
   fn __init__(out self, a: String, b: Int, __list_literal__: ()): pass

fn test():
  # Weird but accepted.
  var a: StringIntListLiteral = ["foo", 2]
```

While this is possible, this isn't something you should actually do.  The reason
that this is important to support is `PythonObject` which takes a heterogenous
collection of values that conform to `PythonConvertible`.

## Set literals

TODO.

## Dictionary literals

Like other forms of literals, a type enables support for Dictionary literals by
implementing a constructor.  Here is `Dict` for example:

```mojo
struct Dict[K: KeyElement, V: Copyable & Movable](...):
    fn __init__(
        out self,
        owned keys: List[K],
        owned values: List[V],
        __dict_literal__: (),
    ): ...
```

As with other literal types, the `__dict_literal__` argument avoids ambiguity
with other constructors.  The constructor takes a list of keys and a list of
values.  These are passed separately (rather than as a list of tuples) because
this enables more flexibility in type merging for slightly different types,
e.g. we want `{k1: 4.0, k2: 5}` to produce a value of type `Float64` even though
the literals have different types.

The actual type of the `keys` and `values` lists are flexible: the compiler
passes the keys and values as a list literal, so all the rules for list literals
apply to these arguments.

## Initializer lists

TODO.
