mojo/proposals/string-design.md, before:

# Mojo `String` type

**Status**: Implemented

## Introduction

This document provides a high-level design doc and details about the core Mojo
`String` type.  It is meant to be a bit of a reference and answer some questions
about its design and non-obvious tradeoffs.

## Basic Features

The Mojo `String` type is designed to be an efficient owning datatype that can
be used for a range of purposes in application programming.  It needs to be
efficient, it needs to have convenient APIs, and it needs to be able to
interoperate.

Some high-level capabilities it provides:

- Unicode support.

- Zero copy from constant data like string literals.

- "Short string optimization" to avoid allocating for small strings.

- Ability to interoperate with 'nul' terminated C string APIs.

etc.  This document will examine some of the basics of how it works and why. It
can be extended over time.

## Representation implementation

The `String` type is designed to be three-machine words in size: 24 bytes on a
64-bit system, and 12 bytes on a 32-bit system.  It has two primary forms: an
"inline" representation when the string data is short, and an "indirect"
representation when the string points to external data.  Both formats use a
common set of "Flags" bits at the top of the object.

### Shared Flags

The shared layout looks like this on a 64-bit system (32-bit systems are the
same but have fewer bytes).  This is the machine memory layout, where the first
`?` is the first byte in the start of the string:

```text
[ ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?,   # "_ptr_or_data": the first word in memory
  ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?,   # "_len_or_data": the second word
  ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, OF ] # "_capacity_or_data": the third word
```

The `OF` byte is the last byte in the memory object.  It has three flags that
are valid or either representation:

- `FLAG_IS_INLINE` is the top-most bit (the sign bit of the word).  This bit
  indicates whether the rest of the bytes are in the "inline" representation or
  the "indirect" representation.  It is the most frequently accessed of all the
  flags, so it is important that it is fast.  Being the top bit allows hardware
  to just check to see if the 3rd word is negative.

- `FLAG_IS_STATIC_CONSTANT` is the next bit, which indicates whether if indirect
  string is pointing to static constant data.  If so, the data is not
  deallocated, and must be copied before any mutation of the string. This is
  never set for inline strings.

- `FLAG_HAS_NUL_TERMINATOR` is the next bit, which indicates if the string is
  known to have an accessible "NUL" byte just beyond its declared length.  This
  allows inter-operating with C APIs that want nul-terminated strings. This bit
  is valid for both representations.

In the implementation, the multiplexing of the representation is handled and
mostly encapsulated by the `_StringCapacityField` struct, which is the type of
the `_capacity_or_data` word.  Please keep implementation details inside of this
type.  The `String` type makes sure to access each word as a whole using loads
and shifts and masking to allow LLVM to fold accesses to the bitfields in
`_capacity_or_data` effectively.

Given the common flags, we'll now look at the meaning of the other bytes in both
representations.

### Inline String Representation

For an inline string, the `?` bytes are all parts of the string data.  For
example if you create a string with the value "abcd" (but not as a literal) it
can be stored as:

```text
[ a, b, c, d, ?, ?, ?, ?,    # "_ptr_or_data": holding data.
  ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?,    # "_len_or_data": holding data.
  ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, OF ]  # "_capacity_or_data": holding data + size + flags
```

This allows the `String` to store up to 23-bytes of text data inline on 64-bit
systems, and 11 bytes on 32-bit systems.  This is enough to hold many common
strings inline, including most Grapheme clusters, most simple integers converted
to a string, etc.

When in this form, the length of the string is stored in the low 5 bits of `OF`,
and is accessed with the `INLINE_LENGTH_START` and `INLINE_LENGTH_MASK`
constants. The `FLAG_IS_STATIC_CONSTANT` flag is never set in this
representation.

### Indirect String Representation

Small strings are important for performance, but we need indirect strings for
generality.  When the "is_inline()" predicate returns false, the representation
of the string looks like this:

```text
[ <<pointer address>>,   # "_ptr_or_data": address of the target.
  <<string length>>,     # "_len_or_data": the size in bytes.
  <<capacity + flags>> ] # "_capacity_or_data": capacity + flags
```

The first word contains a pointer with the address of the start of the string
data.  When in this representation, this is what `unsafe_ptr()` returns.
Similarly, the second word contains the number of bytes in the string, which is
returned by `len(str)` and `str.byte_length()` when in this representation.
These two fields allow us to point to arbitrary-sized strings.

The third field is a bit trickier - it holds the capacity of the string as well
as the three flags described above.  To make sure we can hold an arbitrary
capacity string, the `String` type does a trick: it guarantees the the actual
capacity will be a multiple of 8, which allows it to shift the capacity down by
three bits, making room for the flags.

In this representation, the `FLAG_IS_STATIC_CONSTANT` bit may be set - this
indicates that the pointer is to something that can never change and will never
be deallocated - things like a string literal or a slice from a `StaticString`.
The `String` type uses this form to avoid having to make a heap allocation or
copy of string literals.  See below for more details.

## Unicode support

TOWRITE.

## Other design topics

This section contains implementation details about the `String` type that may be
non-obvious.

### References to constant strings

As mentioned in the "indirect" representation section, the pointer of an an
indirect string may refer to static constant data when the
`FLAG_IS_STATIC_CONSTANT` bit is set.  This optimization is important because
string literals are very common, and we don't want users to have to worry about
use of `String` vs `StaticString` for optimization purposes: most APIs should
just take `String` for consistency and generality.

In addition to setting the bit to know whether the pointer is to a constant
string, it is important to know that the `String` type also sets its notion of
"capacity" to zero.  This ensures that any attempt to append or access will
immediately reallocate without extra checks.  This is a minor optimization and
simplification of code, but it means that static constant strings will have
`capacity=0` but have `length=n` where `n > 0`.

### Mutable String Views

The `String` type may contain pointers to static-constant memory, but
nevertheless it is sometimes important to provides mutable slice and mutable
pointer access to the underlying string data.  We do this by making lazy
(on-demand) copies of immutable data when the client needs a mutable view.

However, internal-mutation is somewhat rare - the most common string mutation
method is a simple append, and that often needs to reallocate the string.  We
want to constrain the API so we don't make unnecessary copies, so we split these
API's into non-mutating with short names e.g. `str.unsafe_ptr()` and provide
explicit mutable access with `_mut` suffixed version of these:

```mojo
def test_copy():
    var s0 = String("find")
    var s1 = String(s0)       # Maintains a pointer to immutable memory
    s1.unsafe_ptr_mut()[3] = ord("e")
    assert_equal("find", s0)
    assert_equal("fine", s1)
```

This keeps the common case fast and simple and avoids allocating memory in many
cases.  See the `test_string.mojo` unit test for more details.

### 'nul' terminated string support

Mojo is a pragmatic language and needs to interoperate with existing C APIs, and
many of them accept nul-terminated strings.  To do so, String provides a
`str.unsafe_cstr_ptr()` method that will produce an `UnsafePointer` that is
guaranteed to be nul terminated.

`Nul` termination is a bit of a nuisance: it makes appending to strings slower,
it prevents referring to slices into the middle of static strings, it can be
incorrect if the string contains an embedded nul, and it is unnecessary for the
vast majority of strings. Nevertheless, this is still an important feature for
`String` to provide support for.

`String`'s approach is to take a lazy-approach: it only guarantees
nul-termination when the `str.unsafe_cstr_ptr()` method is called. This requires
the `str.unsafe_cstr_ptr()` method to be a mutating method (because it can
modify the underlying string data). `String` keeps track of whether a `nul` has
been added to make future queries more efficient with the
`FLAG_HAS_NUL_TERMINATOR`.  The Mojo compiler guarantees that data pointed to
by the `StringLiteral` type is always `nul` terminated: these guarantees work
together so Mojo never needs to make a copy of a string literal when passed to
a C string - it remembers the nul is there, which avoids having to mutate it.

Commit message:

[mojo-stdlib] Use SSO for short constant strings.
This changes `String` to copy string data out of literals when they
are small enough to fit into SSO.  This is better for cache locality
when using the string (because you eliminate a pointer indirection)
and simplifies the implementation by eliminating the
"indirect->inline" state transition possiblity.

This patch also includes a microoptimization to
`String(capacity: XYZ):` that leaves the fields of `String`
uninitialized when using the inline representation.

This Fixes https://github.com/modular/max/issues/4395

MODULAR_ORIG_COMMIT_REV_ID: 0b81a16dc9ac39ba204cdbfa9a66bfc6df553253

mojo/proposals/string-design.md, after:

# Mojo `String` type

**Status**: Implemented

## Introduction

This document provides a high-level design doc and details about the core Mojo
`String` type.  It is meant to be a bit of a reference and answer some questions
about its design and non-obvious tradeoffs.

## Basic Features

The Mojo `String` type is designed to be an efficient owning datatype that can
be used for a range of purposes in application programming.  It needs to be
efficient, it needs to have convenient APIs, and it needs to be able to
interoperate.

Some high-level capabilities it provides:

- Unicode support.

- Zero copy from constant data like string literals.

- "Short string optimization" to avoid allocating for small strings.

- Ability to interoperate with 'nul' terminated C string APIs.

etc.  This document will examine some of the basics of how it works and why. It
can be extended over time.

## Representation implementation

The `String` type is designed to be three-machine words in size: 24 bytes on a
64-bit system, and 12 bytes on a 32-bit system.  It has two primary forms: an
"inline" representation when the string data is short, and an "indirect"
representation when the string points to external data.  Both formats use a
common set of "Flags" bits at the top of the object.

### Shared Flags

The shared layout looks like this on a 64-bit system (32-bit systems are the
same but have fewer bytes).  This is the machine memory layout, where the first
`?` is the first byte in the start of the string:

```text
[ ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?,   # "_ptr_or_data": the first word in memory
  ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?,   # "_len_or_data": the second word
  ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, OF ] # "_capacity_or_data": the third word
```

The `OF` byte is the last byte in the memory object.  It has three flags that
are valid or either representation:

- `FLAG_IS_INLINE` is the top-most bit (the sign bit of the word).  This bit
  indicates whether the rest of the bytes are in the "inline" representation or
  the "indirect" representation.  It is the most frequently accessed of all the
  flags, so it is important that it is fast.  Being the top bit allows hardware
  to just check to see if the 3rd word is negative.

- `FLAG_IS_STATIC_CONSTANT` is the next bit, which indicates whether if indirect
  string is pointing to static constant data.  If so, the data is not
  deallocated, and must be copied before any mutation of the string. This is
  never set for inline strings.

- `FLAG_HAS_NUL_TERMINATOR` is the next bit, which indicates if the string is
  known to have an accessible "NUL" byte just beyond its declared length.  This
  allows inter-operating with C APIs that want nul-terminated strings. This bit
  is valid for both representations.

In the implementation, the multiplexing of the representation is handled and
mostly encapsulated by the `_StringCapacityField` struct, which is the type of
the `_capacity_or_data` word.  Please keep implementation details inside of this
type.  The `String` type makes sure to access each word as a whole using loads
and shifts and masking to allow LLVM to fold accesses to the bitfields in
`_capacity_or_data` effectively.

Given the common flags, we'll now look at the meaning of the other bytes in both
representations.

### Inline String Representation

For an inline string, the `?` bytes are all parts of the string data.  For
example if you create a string with the value "abcd" (but not as a literal) it
can be stored as:

```text
[ a, b, c, d, ?, ?, ?, ?,    # "_ptr_or_data": holding data.
  ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?,    # "_len_or_data": holding data.
  ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, ?, OF ]  # "_capacity_or_data": holding data + size + flags
```

This allows the `String` to store up to 23-bytes of text data inline on 64-bit
systems, and 11 bytes on 32-bit systems.  This is enough to hold many common
strings inline, including most Grapheme clusters, most simple integers converted
to a string, etc.

When in this form, the length of the string is stored in the low 5 bits of `OF`,
and is accessed with the `INLINE_LENGTH_START` and `INLINE_LENGTH_MASK`
constants. The `FLAG_IS_STATIC_CONSTANT` flag is never set in this
representation.

### Indirect String Representation

Small strings are important for performance, but we need indirect strings for
generality.  When the "is_inline()" predicate returns false, the representation
of the string looks like this:

```text
[ <<pointer address>>,   # "_ptr_or_data": address of the target.
  <<string length>>,     # "_len_or_data": the size in bytes.
  <<capacity + flags>> ] # "_capacity_or_data": capacity + flags
```

The first word contains a pointer with the address of the start of the string
data.  When in this representation, this is what `unsafe_ptr()` returns.
Similarly, the second word contains the number of bytes in the string, which is
returned by `len(str)` and `str.byte_length()` when in this representation.
These two fields allow us to point to arbitrary-sized strings.

The third field is a bit trickier - it holds the capacity of the string as well
as the three flags described above.  To make sure we can hold an arbitrary
capacity string, the `String` type does a trick: it guarantees the the actual
capacity will be a multiple of 8, which allows it to shift the capacity down by
three bits, making room for the flags.

In this representation, the `FLAG_IS_STATIC_CONSTANT` bit may be set - this
indicates that the pointer is to something that can never change and will never
be deallocated - things like a string literal or a slice from a `StaticString`.
The `String` type uses this form to avoid having to make a heap allocation or
copy of string literals.  See below for more details.

## Unicode support

TOWRITE.

## Other design topics

This section contains implementation details about the `String` type that may be
non-obvious.

### References to constant strings

As mentioned in the "indirect" representation section, the pointer of an an
indirect string may refer to static constant data when the
`FLAG_IS_STATIC_CONSTANT` bit is set.  This optimization is important because
string literals are very common, and we don't want users to have to worry about
use of `String` vs `StaticString` for optimization purposes: most APIs should
just take `String` for consistency and generality.

In addition to setting the bit to know whether the pointer is to a constant
string, it is important to know that the `String` type also sets its notion of
"capacity" to zero.  This ensures that any attempt to append or access will
immediately reallocate without extra checks.  This is a minor optimization and
simplification of code, but it means that static constant strings will have
`capacity=0` but have `length=n` where `n > 0`.

Construction from short constant strings (like "foo") loads the string data at
`String` construction time, which keeps usage of the string direct where
possible.

### Mutable String Views

The `String` type may contain pointers to static-constant memory, but
nevertheless it is sometimes important to provides mutable slice and mutable
pointer access to the underlying string data.  We do this by making lazy
(on-demand) copies of immutable data when the client needs a mutable view.

However, internal-mutation is somewhat rare - the most common string mutation
method is a simple append, and that often needs to reallocate the string.  We
want to constrain the API so we don't make unnecessary copies, so we split these
API's into non-mutating with short names e.g. `str.unsafe_ptr()` and provide
explicit mutable access with `_mut` suffixed version of these:

```mojo
def test_copy():
    var s0 = String("find")
    var s1 = String(s0)       # Maintains a pointer to immutable memory
    s1.unsafe_ptr_mut()[3] = ord("e")
    assert_equal("find", s0)
    assert_equal("fine", s1)
```

This keeps the common case fast and simple and avoids allocating memory in many
cases.  See the `test_string.mojo` unit test for more details.

### 'nul' terminated string support

Mojo is a pragmatic language and needs to interoperate with existing C APIs, and
many of them accept nul-terminated strings.  To do so, String provides a
`str.unsafe_cstr_ptr()` method that will produce an `UnsafePointer` that is
guaranteed to be nul terminated.

`Nul` termination is a bit of a nuisance: it makes appending to strings slower,
it prevents referring to slices into the middle of static strings, it can be
incorrect if the string contains an embedded nul, and it is unnecessary for the
vast majority of strings. Nevertheless, this is still an important feature for
`String` to provide support for.

`String`'s approach is to take a lazy-approach: it only guarantees
nul-termination when the `str.unsafe_cstr_ptr()` method is called. This requires
the `str.unsafe_cstr_ptr()` method to be a mutating method (because it can
modify the underlying string data). `String` keeps track of whether a `nul` has
been added to make future queries more efficient with the
`FLAG_HAS_NUL_TERMINATOR`.  The Mojo compiler guarantees that data pointed to
by the `StringLiteral` type is always `nul` terminated: these guarantees work
together so Mojo never needs to make a copy of a string literal when passed to
a C string - it remembers the nul is there, which avoids having to mutate it.
