mojo/docs/lib.mdx, before:

---
title: Mojo reference
sidebar_label: Overview
hide_table_of_contents: false
description: Mojo standard library and other references
listing:
  - id: stdlib
    contents: 'stdlib/*/index.md'
    type: grid
    page-size: 99
  - id: decorators
    contents: 'manual/decorators/*.md'
    type: grid
    page-size: 20
  - id: maxlib
    contents: '../max/api/mojo/*/index.md'
    type: grid
    page-size: 20
---

This section includes the API reference for the Mojo standard library, as well
as a reference for Mojo decorators and the Mojo CLI.

## How to read the Mojo API docs

Mojo syntax is covered in detail in the [Mojo manual](/mojo/manual/). Here's a
quick cheat-sheet on reading struct and function signatures.

### Arguments

Function arguments appear in parentheses after the function name:

```mojo
fn example_fn(pos: Int, /, pos_or_kw: Int, *, kw_only: Bool = False):
    ...
```

Here's a quick overview of some special syntax in the argument list:

- Slash (`/`): arguments declared before a slash are
  [positional-only arguments](/mojo/manual/functions#positional-only-and-keyword-only-arguments).

- Star (`*`): a star by itself in place of an argument indicates that the
  arguments after the star are
  [keyword-only](/mojo/manual/functions#positional-only-and-keyword-only-arguments).

- An equals sign (`=`) introduces a default value for an
  [optional argument](/mojo/manual/functions#optional-arguments).

You may also see argument names prefixed with one or two stars (`*`):

```mojo
def myfunc2(*names, **attributes):
```

- An argument name prefixed by a single star character, like `*names` identifies
  a [variadic argument](/mojo/manual/functions/#variadic-arguments).

- An argument name prefixed with a double star, like `**attributes` identifies a
  [variadic keyword-only argument](/mojo/manual/functions/#variadic-keyword-arguments).

An argument may also be preceded by an _argument convention_, which indicates
how the value is passed:

```mojo
fn sort(mut names: List[String]):
```

The most common conventions are:

- `read`(default): the callee receives an **immutable reference** to the value.
- `mut`: the callee receives a **mutable reference** to the value.
- `owned`: the callee receives ownership of a value.

For details and a complete list of argument conventions, see
[Argument conventions](/mojo/manual/values/ownership#argument-conventions).

### Parameters

Mojo structs and functions can take parameters. Parameters are evaluated
at compilation time, and act as constants at runtime. Parameter lists are
enclosed in square brackets:

```mojo
struct ExampleStruct[size: Int, //, thing: Thing[size]]:
```

Parameters that occur before a double-slash (`//`) in the parameter list are
[infer-only parameters](/mojo/manual/parameters/#infer-only-parameters). You
usually don't need to specify infer-only parameters; as the name suggests,
they're usually inferred.

Like arguments, parameters can be positional-only, keyword-or-positional, or
keyword-only, and they can be required or optional. The `/`, `*`, and `=`
characters have the same meaning in parameter lists as they do in argument lists.

## Mojo standard library

The Mojo standard library provides nearly everything you'll need for
writing Mojo programs, including basic data types like
[`Int`](/mojo/stdlib/builtin/int/Int) and
[`SIMD`](/mojo/stdlib/builtin/simd/SIMD), collection types like
[`List`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/list/List), reusable
[algorithms](/mojo/stdlib/algorithm/) and modules to support
[GPU programming](/mojo/stdlib/gpu).

Here are all the top-level packages:

:::🔥#stdlib
:::

## MAX library

The Mojo MAX library provides APIs to interact with the MAX graph compiler
and runtime.

:::🔥#maxlib
:::


## Mojo decorators

A Mojo decorator is a higher-order function that modifies or extends the
behavior of a struct, a function, or some other code.

:::🔥#decorators
:::

## Mojo CLI reference

The `mojo` CLI provides commands to help you develop, run, build,
and debug Mojo programs.

[See the `mojo` docs](/mojo/cli/).

Commit message:

[Docs] Doc updates for kernel library. Update links to layout APIs.
Mostly link fixes. Plus updates to the Mojo reference landing page and
some assorted API doc fixes that I ran into along the way.

MODULAR_ORIG_COMMIT_REV_ID: 1ee56596df7eca7dd7ea85055f28b7654bd8fedd

mojo/docs/lib.mdx, after:

---
title: Mojo reference
sidebar_label: Overview
hide_table_of_contents: false
description: Mojo standard library and other references
listing:
  - id: stdlib
    contents: 'stdlib/*/index.md'
    type: grid
    page-size: 99
  - id: kernels
    contents: 'kernels/*/index.md'
    type: grid
    page-size: 99
  - id: decorators
    contents: 'manual/decorators/*.md'
    type: grid
    page-size: 20
  - id: maxlib
    contents: '../max/api/mojo/*/index.md'
    type: grid
    page-size: 20
---

This section includes the Mojo API references:

- [Standard library](#standard-library): Common Mojo APIs.
- [Kernels library](#kernels-library). Mojo APIs for writing high-performance
  computational kernels and custom operations.
- [MAX library](#max-library). MAX Mojo APIs, including tensor APIs for custom
  operations, and legacy MAX APIs.
- [Decorators](#decorators). Mojo decorators reference.

## How to read the Mojo API docs

Mojo syntax is covered in detail in the [Mojo manual](/mojo/manual/). Here's a
quick cheat-sheet on reading struct and function signatures.

### Arguments

Function arguments appear in parentheses after the function name:

```mojo
fn example_fn(pos: Int, /, pos_or_kw: Int, *, kw_only: Bool = False):
    ...
```

Here's a quick overview of some special syntax in the argument list:

- Slash (`/`): arguments declared before a slash are
  [positional-only arguments](/mojo/manual/functions#positional-only-and-keyword-only-arguments).

- Star (`*`): a star by itself in place of an argument indicates that the
  arguments after the star are
  [keyword-only](/mojo/manual/functions#positional-only-and-keyword-only-arguments).

- An equals sign (`=`) introduces a default value for an
  [optional argument](/mojo/manual/functions#optional-arguments).

You may also see argument names prefixed with one or two stars (`*`):

```mojo
def myfunc2(*names, **attributes):
```

- An argument name prefixed by a single star character, like `*names` identifies
  a [variadic argument](/mojo/manual/functions/#variadic-arguments).

- An argument name prefixed with a double star, like `**attributes` identifies a
  [variadic keyword-only argument](/mojo/manual/functions/#variadic-keyword-arguments).

An argument may also be preceded by an _argument convention_, which indicates
how the value is passed:

```mojo
fn sort(mut names: List[String]):
```

The most common conventions are:

- `read`(default): the callee receives an **immutable reference** to the value.
- `mut`: the callee receives a **mutable reference** to the value.
- `owned`: the callee receives ownership of a value.

For details and a complete list of argument conventions, see
[Argument conventions](/mojo/manual/values/ownership#argument-conventions).

### Parameters

Mojo structs and functions can take parameters. Parameters are evaluated
at compilation time, and act as constants at runtime. Parameter lists are
enclosed in square brackets:

```mojo
struct ExampleStruct[size: Int, //, thing: Thing[size]]:
```

Parameters that occur before a double-slash (`//`) in the parameter list are
[infer-only parameters](/mojo/manual/parameters/#infer-only-parameters). You
usually don't need to specify infer-only parameters; as the name suggests,
they're usually inferred.

Like arguments, parameters can be positional-only, keyword-or-positional, or
keyword-only, and they can be required or optional. The `/`, `*`, and `=`
characters have the same meaning in parameter lists as they do in argument lists.

## Standard library

The Mojo standard library provides nearly everything you'll need for
writing Mojo programs, including basic data types like
[`Int`](/mojo/stdlib/builtin/int/Int) and
[`SIMD`](/mojo/stdlib/builtin/simd/SIMD), collection types like
[`List`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/list/List), reusable
[algorithms](/mojo/stdlib/algorithm/) and modules to support
[GPU programming](/mojo/stdlib/gpu).

Top-level packages:

:::🔥#stdlib
:::

## Kernels library

The Mojo kernels library provides APIs for writing computational kernels that
run on CPU and GPU. You can use these APIs when developing
[MAX custom operations](/max/custom-ops/) or standalone
[GPU kernels](/mojo/manual/gpu/basics).

Top-level packages:

:::🔥#kernels
:::


## MAX library

The Mojo MAX library provides APIs to interact with the MAX graph compiler
and runtime.

Top-level packages:

:::🔥#maxlib
:::


## Decorators

A Mojo decorator is a higher-order function that modifies or extends the
behavior of a struct, a function, or some other code.

:::🔥#decorators
:::
