examples/custom_ops/README.md, before:

# Writing custom CPU or GPU graph operations using Mojo

> [!NOTE]
> This is a preview of an interface for writing custom operations in Mojo,
> and may be subject to change before the next stable release.

Graphs in MAX can be extended to use custom operations written in Mojo. The
following examples are shown here:

- **addition**: Adding 1 to every element of an input tensor.
- **mandelbrot**: Calculating the Mandelbrot set.
- **vector_addition**: Performing vector addition using a manual GPU function.
- **top_k**: A top-K token sampler, a complex operation that shows a real-world
  use case for a custom operation used today within a large language model
  processing pipeline.
- **matrix_multiplication**: Various matrix multiplication algorithms, using a
  memory layout abstraction.
- **fused_attention**: A fused attention operation, which leverages many of the
  available MAX GPU programming features to show how to address an important
  use case in AI models.

Custom kernels have been written in Mojo to carry out these calculations. For
each example, a simple graph containing a single operation is constructed
in Python. This graph is compiled and dispatched onto a supported GPU if one is
available, or the CPU if not. Input tensors, if there are any, are moved from
the host to the device on which the graph is running. The graph then runs and
the results are copied back to the host for display.

One thing to note is that this same Mojo code runs on CPU as well as GPU. In
the construction of the graph, it runs on a supported accelerator if one is
available or falls back to the CPU if not. No code changes for either path.
The `vector_addition` example shows how this works under the hood for common
MAX abstractions, where compile-time specialization lets MAX choose the optimal
code path for a given hardware architecture.

The `kernels/` directory contains the custom kernel implementations, and the
graph construction occurs in the Python files in the base directory. These
examples are designed to stand on their own, so that they can be used as
templates for experimentation.

A single Magic command runs each of the examples:

```sh
magic run addition
magic run mandelbrot
magic run vector_addition
magic run top_k
magic run matrix_multiplication
magic run fused_attention
```

The execution has two phases: first a `kernels.mojopkg` is compiled from the
custom Mojo kernel, and then the graph is constructed and run in Python. The
inference session is pointed to the `kernels.mojopkg` in order to load the
custom operations.

You can also run benchmarks to compare the performance of your GPU to your CPU:

```sh
magic run benchmark
```

Commit message:

[Examples] Switch all custom ops examples to use on-demand compilation of Mojo code
This changes the custom ops examples files to use the new support for
on-demand compilation Mojo code. We no longer have to build the Mojo
code into a .mojopkg as a separate step before running the Python MAX
graph execution.

MODULAR_ORIG_COMMIT_REV_ID: 4750693adeb76bb1aa13eb9dd5583f05f1f9442d

examples/custom_ops/README.md, after:

# Writing custom CPU or GPU graph operations using Mojo

> [!NOTE]
> This is a preview of an interface for writing custom operations in Mojo,
> and may be subject to change before the next stable release.

Graphs in MAX can be extended to use custom operations written in Mojo. The
following examples are shown here:

- **addition**: Adding 1 to every element of an input tensor.
- **mandelbrot**: Calculating the Mandelbrot set.
- **vector_addition**: Performing vector addition using a manual GPU function.
- **top_k**: A top-K token sampler, a complex operation that shows a real-world
  use case for a custom operation used today within a large language model
  processing pipeline.
- **matrix_multiplication**: Various matrix multiplication algorithms, using a
  memory layout abstraction.
- **fused_attention**: A fused attention operation, which leverages many of the
  available MAX GPU programming features to show how to address an important
  use case in AI models.

Custom kernels have been written in Mojo to carry out these calculations. For
each example, a simple graph containing a single operation is constructed
in Python. This graph is compiled and dispatched onto a supported GPU if one is
available, or the CPU if not. Input tensors, if there are any, are moved from
the host to the device on which the graph is running. The graph then runs and
the results are copied back to the host for display.

One thing to note is that this same Mojo code runs on CPU as well as GPU. In
the construction of the graph, it runs on a supported accelerator if one is
available or falls back to the CPU if not. No code changes for either path.
The `vector_addition` example shows how this works under the hood for common
MAX abstractions, where compile-time specialization lets MAX choose the optimal
code path for a given hardware architecture.

The `kernels/` directory contains the custom kernel implementations, and the
graph construction occurs in the Python files in the base directory. These
examples are designed to stand on their own, so that they can be used as
templates for experimentation.

A single Magic command runs each of the examples:

```sh
magic run addition
magic run mandelbrot
magic run vector_addition
magic run top_k
magic run matrix_multiplication
magic run fused_attention
```

`magic run <example>` runs the associated Python example, taking care
to ensure the necessary dependencies (i.e. the `max` package) are visible.
The Python code will construct the graph and related inference session state.
The Mojo kernels code defining the custom operations will be (re)compiled on the
fly as needed, ensuring the executing graph is always using the latest version
of the Mojo code.

You can also run benchmarks to compare the performance of your GPU to your CPU:

```sh
magic run benchmark
```
