mojo/integration-test/python-extension-modules/README.md, before:

# Python -> Mojo Bindings Integration Tests

This directory contains tests for calling Mojo from Python.

## Tests

> [!WARNING]
>
> These tests are not representative of what the final state of the Python <=>
> Mojo interop experience will look like. Do not attempt to copy the structure
> used in these tests, as it will likely change and your code will break. This
> functionality is not ready for usage yet.

The tests can be run using Bazel:

```shell
bazel test //open-source/max/mojo/integration-test:lit
```

### Test #1: [./basic](./basic/)

This is a minimal smoke test, testing calling a simple Mojo function from
Python.

The initial contents are:

```text
basic-raw
├── mojo_module.mojo
└── main.py
```

Build manually using:

```shell
mojo build mojo_module.mojo --emit shared-lib -o mojo_module.so
```

Which will result in a `mojo_module.so` being built and placed alongside the
existing files:

```text
basic
├── mojo_module.a
├── mojo_module.mojo
├── mojo_module.so
└── main.py
```

(The mojo_module.a file is an intermediate artifact that can be deleted.)

Running the Python `main.py` code will load and run compiled Mojo code
from `mojo_module.so`:

```shell
% python main.py
Result from Mojo 🔥: 2
```

### Test #2: [./feature-overview](./feature-overview/)

This test aims to include a basic test for each supported Mojo language
feature that is usable across the Python <=> Mojo interop boundary.

Commit message:

[python-bindings] docs: Move `basic-pybind` to KGEN + polish bindings tests README.md (#61943)
This is in preparation for making the tests directory public in the near
future:

    //open-source/max/mojo/integration-test/python-extension-modules/

The basic-pybind test covers the very incomplete `--gen-py`
functionality for compiler-driven bindings, which are not ready for use
and not actively being developed.

To prevent user confusion about how the bindings work, we'll keep this
test internal for now, so that the only publicly visible way of writing
bindings is using the "manual" bindings APIs.

Additionally, make some minor cleanups to the README.md in the tests
directory.

PYTHON_BINDINGS_ORIG_REV_ID: 830ee9e087474c6c67fc521a35b7c4398b02b686

mojo/integration-test/python-extension-modules/README.md, after:

# Python -> Mojo Bindings Integration Tests

This directory contains tests for calling Mojo from Python.

## Tests

The tests can be run using Bazel:

```shell
bazel test //open-source/max/mojo/integration-test:lit
```

The tests typically have the following structure:

```text
<name>
├── main.py
└── mojo_module.mojo
```

where `main.py` is the test entrypoint, which compiles and loads
`mojo_module.mojo` as a
[Python extension module](https://docs.python.org/3/extending/extending.html).

`mojo_module.mojo` should contain Mojo code written to be called from Python,
and `main.py` should test that exposed Mojo code.

## File Overview

- [./basic-raw](./basic-raw/) — a minimal low-level smoke test, calling a simple
  Mojo function from Python. Uses the low-level "raw" function bindings, which
  are more error prone.

- [./feature-overview](./feature-overview/) — This test aims to include a basic
  test for each supported Mojo language feature that is usable across the
  Python <=> Mojo interop boundary.

## Manual Test Procedure

Python extension modules are just dynamic libraries that expose a suitable
`PyInit_<module_name>()` function. To build a Mojo library into an extension
module, you can use the following command:

```shell
mojo build mojo_module.mojo --emit shared-lib -o mojo_module.so
```

Which will result in a `mojo_module.so` being built and placed alongside the
existing files:

```text
<name>
├── mojo_module.mojo
├── mojo_module.so
└── main.py
```

Running the Python `main.py` code will load and run compiled Mojo code
from `mojo_module.so`:

```shell
% python main.py
Result from Mojo 🔥: 2
