examples/README.md, before:

# MAX examples

These examples demonstrate the power and flexibility of
[MAX](https://docs.modular.com/max/). They include:

## [Mojo code examples](mojo/)

A collection of sample programs written in the
[Mojo](https://docs.modular.com/mojo/manual/) programming language.

## [Custom GPU and CPU operations in Mojo](custom_ops/)

The [MAX Graph API](https://docs.modular.com/max/graph/) provides a powerful
framework for staging computational graphs to be run on GPUs, CPUs, and more.
Each operation in one of these graphs is defined in
[Mojo](https://docs.modular.com/mojo/), an easy-to-use language for writing
high-performance code.

The examples here illustrate how to construct custom graph operations in Mojo
that run on GPUs and CPUs, as well as how to build computational graphs that
contain and run them on different hardware architectures.

## [Compiling and running Mojo functions on a GPU](gpu_functions/)

In addition to placing custom Mojo functions within a computational graph, the
MAX Driver API can handle direct compilation of GPU functions written in Mojo
and can dispatch them onto the GPU. This is a programming model that may be
familiar to those who have worked with CUDA or similar GPGPU frameworks.

These examples show how to compile and run Mojo functions, from simple to
complex, on an available GPU. Note that
[a MAX-compatible GPU](https://docs.modular.com/max/faq/#gpu-requirements) will
be necessary to build and run these.

## [PyTorch inference on MAX](inference/)

MAX has the power to accelerate existing PyTorch models directly, and
provides Python, Mojo, and C APIs for this. These examples showcase common
models and how to run them even faster via MAX.

## [Jupyter notebooks](notebooks/)

Jupyter notebooks that showcase PyTorch models being accelerated
through MAX.

Commit message:

[python-interop] Initial Python->Mojo interop examples
Adding a couple of examples of the experimental support for calling Mojo
functions from Python. The first two examples are a pretty basic "hello
world" that shows the bare minimum needed for passing values between
Python and Mojo, and a port of our Mandelbrot set calculation on GPU to
a function that can be called from Python.

MODULAR_ORIG_COMMIT_REV_ID: ec62f670b6600cd2c756b179ebf888ecc26f7bf3

examples/README.md, after:

# MAX examples

These examples demonstrate the power and flexibility of
[MAX](https://docs.modular.com/max/). They include:

## [Mojo code examples](mojo/)

A collection of sample programs written in the
[Mojo](https://docs.modular.com/mojo/manual/) programming language.

## [Custom GPU and CPU operations in Mojo](custom_ops/)

The [MAX Graph API](https://docs.modular.com/max/graph/) provides a powerful
framework for staging computational graphs to be run on GPUs, CPUs, and more.
Each operation in one of these graphs is defined in
[Mojo](https://docs.modular.com/mojo/), an easy-to-use language for writing
high-performance code.

The examples here illustrate how to construct custom graph operations in Mojo
that run on GPUs and CPUs, as well as how to build computational graphs that
contain and run them on different hardware architectures.

## [Compiling and running Mojo functions on a GPU](gpu_functions/)

In addition to placing custom Mojo functions within a computational graph, the
MAX Driver API can handle direct compilation of GPU functions written in Mojo
and can dispatch them onto the GPU. This is a programming model that may be
familiar to those who have worked with CUDA or similar GPGPU frameworks.

These examples show how to compile and run Mojo functions, from simple to
complex, on an available GPU. Note that
[a MAX-compatible GPU](https://docs.modular.com/max/faq/#gpu-requirements) will
be necessary to build and run these.

## [Using Mojo from Python](python_mojo_interop/)

To enable progressive introduction of Mojo into an existing Python codebase,
Mojo modules and functions can be referenced as if they were native Python
code. This interoperability between Python and Mojo can allow for slower Python
algorithms to be selectively replaced with faster Mojo alternatives.

These examples illustrate how that can work, including using Mojo functions
running on a compatible GPU.

## [PyTorch inference on MAX](inference/)

MAX has the power to accelerate existing PyTorch models directly, and
provides Python, Mojo, and C APIs for this. These examples showcase common
models and how to run them even faster via MAX.

## [Jupyter notebooks](notebooks/)

Jupyter notebooks that showcase PyTorch models being accelerated
through MAX.
