bazel/docs/usage.md, before:

# Using bazel

Some parts of this repository are setup to build and test with the
[`bazel`](https://bazel.build) build system. This document describes the
common workflows.

## Setup

- On macOS make sure you have a relatively recent version of Xcode or
  the Xcode Command Line Tools installed.
- `bazel` automatically downloads the current nightly version of `mojo`
  (defined in the
  [`MODULE.bazel`](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/MODULE.bazel)),
  meaning it does not pick up the current globally installed version.
- For convenience there is a
  [`bazelw`](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/bazelw) script
  in the root of the repository that automatically downloads the
  currently supported version of `bazel`.

## Examples

`bazel` has 2 primary subcommands you will interact with `build` and
`test`. For example to build all the code in the repository you can run:

```sh
./bazelw build //...
```

You can also build more specific targets when you're iterating on a
subset of the repository. For example to package only the `stdlib`, you
can run:

```sh
./bazelw build //mojo/stdlib/stdlib
```

Similarly to run all the tests in the repository you can run:

```sh
./bazelw test //...
```

You can also scope build or test commands to specific directories. For
example to run only the `stdlib` tests you can run:

```sh
./bazelw test //mojo/stdlib/...
```

To see what targets are available to build or test you can run:

```sh
./bazelw query //...
```

Some tests in the repository only support specific hardware. In that
case `bazel` automatically skips building and testing them. `bazel` also
automatically detects the current GPU hardware, so tests that are
specific to individual GPUs can be run.

## `BUILD.bazel` file

The `BUILD.bazel` files throughout the repository define how targets are
built and tested. There are a few common rules that are used.

### `mojo_library`

To produce a `mojopkg` that can be consumed by other Mojo code, you can
use the `mojo_library` rule. For example:

```bzl
load("//bazel:api.bzl", "mojo_library")

mojo_library(
    name = "some_library",
    srcs = glob(["**/*.mojo"]),
    visibility = ["//visibility:public"],
    deps = [
        "@mojo//:stdlib",
    ],
)
```

### `mojo_binary`

To produce a binary that runs Mojo code, you can use the `mojo_binary`
rule:

```bzl
load("//bazel:api.bzl", "mojo_binary")

mojo_binary(
    name = "example",
    srcs = ["src/example.mojo"],
    deps = [
        "@mojo//:stdlib",
    ],
)
```

### `mojo_test` / `mojo_filecheck_test`

To add new test targets we have a few different rules depending on the
use case.

If you're writing a test that needs to compile and execute a Mojo
binary, that then uses the `testing` module to write assertions, you can
use the `mojo_test` rule:

```bzl
mojo_test(
    name = "test_hash",
    srcs = ["hashlib/test_hash.mojo"],
    deps = [
        "@mojo//:stdlib",
    ],
)
```

If you're writing a test that needs to compile and execute a Mojo
binary, that then needs to check its output using `FileCheck`, you can
use `mojo_filecheck_test` rule:

```bzl
mojo_filecheck_test(
    name = "test_shared_mem_barrier.mojo.test",
    srcs = ["test_shared_mem_barrier.mojo"],
    deps = [
        "@mojo//:layout",
        "@mojo//:linalg",
        "@mojo//:stdlib",
    ],
)
```

When possible, prefer using `mojo_test` since the assertions should be
easier to debug.

### Other attributes

`bazel` rules have many different knobs for customizing how things are
built and run. There are a few important ones for this repository.

#### `target_compatible_with`

`target_compatible_with` is used to specify the hardware or other
configuration that a target works with, and therefore will be
automatically skipped on when not matched. For example if a test is only
compatible with H100 GPUs, you can specify:

```bzl
target_compatible_with = ["//:h100_gpu"],
```

You can see the current options for different GPUs specifically in the
[`bazel/config.bzl`](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/bazel/config.bzl)
file.

You can also use `target_compatible_with` to specify that a target
requires a specific operating system:

```bzl
target_compatible_with = ["@platforms//os:linux"],
```

If you need to _exclude_ a target from a specific configuration, you can
use something like this:

```bzl
target_compatible_with = select({
    "//:asan": ["@platforms//:incompatible"],
    "//conditions:default": [],
})
```

In this example, the target is disabled when running with ASAN.

#### `tags`

Tags allow filtering targets based on metadata. In this repository we
use the `gpu` tag to specify that a test should be run on GPU hardware.
Currently this only applies to internal Modular CI but should still be
added to make sure tests are run correctly internally.

```bzl
tags = ["gpu"],
```

Commit message:

[docs] Add section on changing the Mojo version
MODULAR_ORIG_COMMIT_REV_ID: bfe361ec889e1e91f51f10e7e624f3cfac323f37

bazel/docs/usage.md, after:

# Using bazel

Some parts of this repository are setup to build and test with the
[`bazel`](https://bazel.build) build system. This document describes the
common workflows.

## Setup

- On macOS make sure you have a relatively recent version of Xcode or
  the Xcode Command Line Tools installed.
- `bazel` automatically downloads the current nightly version of `mojo`
  (defined in the
  [`MODULE.bazel`](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/MODULE.bazel)),
  meaning it does not pick up the current globally installed version.
- For convenience there is a
  [`bazelw`](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/bazelw) script
  in the root of the repository that automatically downloads the
  currently supported version of `bazel`.

## Examples

`bazel` has 2 primary subcommands you will interact with `build` and
`test`. For example to build all the code in the repository you can run:

```sh
./bazelw build //...
```

You can also build more specific targets when you're iterating on a
subset of the repository. For example to package only the `stdlib`, you
can run:

```sh
./bazelw build //mojo/stdlib/stdlib
```

Similarly to run all the tests in the repository you can run:

```sh
./bazelw test //...
```

You can also scope build or test commands to specific directories. For
example to run only the `stdlib` tests you can run:

```sh
./bazelw test //mojo/stdlib/...
```

To see what targets are available to build or test you can run:

```sh
./bazelw query //...
```

Some tests in the repository only support specific hardware. In that
case `bazel` automatically skips building and testing them. `bazel` also
automatically detects the current GPU hardware, so tests that are
specific to individual GPUs can be run.

## Using a different Mojo version

The Mojo version in
[`bazel/mojo.MODULE.bazel`](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/bazel/mojo.MODULE.bazel)
is automatically updated with each nightly, but can be manually replaced
locally to use a different version if desired.

## `BUILD.bazel` file

The `BUILD.bazel` files throughout the repository define how targets are
built and tested. There are a few common rules that are used.

### `mojo_library`

To produce a `mojopkg` that can be consumed by other Mojo code, you can
use the `mojo_library` rule. For example:

```bzl
load("//bazel:api.bzl", "mojo_library")

mojo_library(
    name = "some_library",
    srcs = glob(["**/*.mojo"]),
    visibility = ["//visibility:public"],
    deps = [
        "@mojo//:stdlib",
    ],
)
```

### `mojo_binary`

To produce a binary that runs Mojo code, you can use the `mojo_binary`
rule:

```bzl
load("//bazel:api.bzl", "mojo_binary")

mojo_binary(
    name = "example",
    srcs = ["src/example.mojo"],
    deps = [
        "@mojo//:stdlib",
    ],
)
```

### `mojo_test` / `mojo_filecheck_test`

To add new test targets we have a few different rules depending on the
use case.

If you're writing a test that needs to compile and execute a Mojo
binary, that then uses the `testing` module to write assertions, you can
use the `mojo_test` rule:

```bzl
mojo_test(
    name = "test_hash",
    srcs = ["hashlib/test_hash.mojo"],
    deps = [
        "@mojo//:stdlib",
    ],
)
```

If you're writing a test that needs to compile and execute a Mojo
binary, that then needs to check its output using `FileCheck`, you can
use `mojo_filecheck_test` rule:

```bzl
mojo_filecheck_test(
    name = "test_shared_mem_barrier.mojo.test",
    srcs = ["test_shared_mem_barrier.mojo"],
    deps = [
        "@mojo//:layout",
        "@mojo//:linalg",
        "@mojo//:stdlib",
    ],
)
```

When possible, prefer using `mojo_test` since the assertions should be
easier to debug.

### Other attributes

`bazel` rules have many different knobs for customizing how things are
built and run. There are a few important ones for this repository.

#### `target_compatible_with`

`target_compatible_with` is used to specify the hardware or other
configuration that a target works with, and therefore will be
automatically skipped on when not matched. For example if a test is only
compatible with H100 GPUs, you can specify:

```bzl
target_compatible_with = ["//:h100_gpu"],
```

You can see the current options for different GPUs specifically in the
[`bazel/config.bzl`](https://github.com/modular/modular/blob/main/bazel/config.bzl)
file.

You can also use `target_compatible_with` to specify that a target
requires a specific operating system:

```bzl
target_compatible_with = ["@platforms//os:linux"],
```

If you need to _exclude_ a target from a specific configuration, you can
use something like this:

```bzl
target_compatible_with = select({
    "//:asan": ["@platforms//:incompatible"],
    "//conditions:default": [],
})
```

In this example, the target is disabled when running with ASAN.

#### `tags`

Tags allow filtering targets based on metadata. In this repository we
use the `gpu` tag to specify that a test should be run on GPU hardware.
Currently this only applies to internal Modular CI but should still be
added to make sure tests are run correctly internally.

```bzl
tags = ["gpu"],
```
