max/kernels/README.md, before:

# MAX AI kernels

This directory contains low-level, high-performance compute kernels written in
[Mojo](https://www.modular.com/mojo), designed to serve as building blocks for
numerical, machine learning, and other performance-critical workloads.

Kernels in this directory are written using Mojo's systems programming
capabilities, including fine-grained control over memory layout, parallelism,
and hardware mapping. These implementations prioritize performance and
correctness, and are intended to be used both directly and as primitives in
higher-level libraries.

To evaluate kernel performance on NVIDIA hardware, see [Kernel profiling with
Nsight Compute](docs/profiling.md).

If you're looking for the high-level Python APIs based on these kernels and
used to build MAX graphs, see the [`max/nn/`](../nn) directory.

## Contributing

We will start accepting contributions in early June 2025. See the
[Contributing Guide](./CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## License

Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions

See the license file in the repository for more details.

## Support

For any inquiries, bug reports, or feature requests, please [open an
issue](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues) on the GitHub repository.

Commit message:

[docs] Update contributing guides
This moves all the procedural instructions to the repo’s primary
contributing guide, and leaves only the project-specific contributing
guidelines in sub-directory contributor guides. Also some various
copyedits and updates to the surrounding documentation.

MODULAR_ORIG_COMMIT_REV_ID: a523d304294efca1df0dedf09633d22876b6305b

max/kernels/README.md, after:

# MAX AI kernels

This directory contains low-level, high-performance compute kernels written in
[Mojo](https://www.modular.com/mojo), designed to serve as building blocks for
numerical, machine learning, and other performance-critical workloads.

This library includes production-grade kernel implementations for various CPUs
and GPUs, including NVIDIA GPUs (T4, A10G, L40, A100, H100, RTX 40 series, and
more) and AMD GPUs (MI300X, MI325X, Radeon RX 9000, and more).

These kernels demonstrate powerful Mojo programming features such as
fine-grained control over memory layout, parallelism, and hardware mapping.
These implementations prioritize performance and correctness, and are intended
to be used both directly and as primitives in higher-level libraries.

To evaluate kernel performance on NVIDIA hardware, see [Kernel profiling with
Nsight Compute](docs/profiling.md).

If you're looking for the high-level Python APIs based on these kernels and
used to build MAX graphs, see the [`max/nn/`](../nn) directory.

## Contributing

We're accepting kernel contributions. See the [kernels contributing
guide](./CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## License

Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions

See the license file in the repository for more details.

## Support

For any inquiries, bug reports, or feature requests, please [open an
issue](https://github.com/modular/modular/issues) on the GitHub repository.
