mojo/docs/manual/control-flow.mdx, before:

---
title: Control flow
description: Mojo control flow statements.
---

Mojo includes several traditional control flow structures for conditional and
repeated execution of code blocks.

## The `if` statement

Mojo supports the `if` statement for conditional code execution. With it you can
conditionally execute an indented code block if a given
[boolean](/mojo/manual/types#booleans) expression evaluates to `True`.

```mojo
temp_celsius = 25
if temp_celsius > 20:
    print("It is warm.")
    print("The temperature is", temp_celsius * 9 / 5 + 32, "Fahrenheit." )
```

```output
It is warm.
The temperature is 77.0 Fahrenheit.
```

You can write the entire `if` statement as a single line if all you need to
execute conditionally is a single, short statement.

```mojo
temp_celsius = 22
if temp_celsius < 15: print("It is cool.") # Skipped because condition is False
if temp_celsius > 20: print("It is warm.")
```

```output
It is warm.
```

Optionally, an `if` statement can include any number of additional `elif`
clauses, each specifying a boolean condition and associated code block to
execute if `True`. The conditions are tested in the order given. When a
condition evaluates to `True`, the associated code block is executed and no
further conditions are tested.

Additionally, an `if` statement can include an optional `else` clause providing
a code block to execute if all conditions evaluate to `False`.

```mojo
temp_celsius = 25
if temp_celsius <= 0:
    print("It is freezing.")
elif temp_celsius < 20:
    print("It is cool.")
elif temp_celsius < 30:
    print("It is warm.")
else:
    print("It is hot.")
```

```output
It is warm.
```

:::note TODO

Mojo currently does not support the equivalent of a Python `match` or C `switch`
statement for pattern matching and conditional execution.

:::

### Short-circuit evaluation

Mojo follows [short-circuit evaluation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Short-circuit_evaluation)
semantics for boolean operators. If the first argument to an `or` operator
evaluates to `True`, the second argument is not evaluated.

```mojo
def true_func() -> Bool:
    print("Executing true_func")
    return True

def false_func() -> Bool:
    print("Executing false_func")
    return False

print('Short-circuit "or" evaluation')
if true_func() or false_func():
    print("True result")
```

```output
Short-circuit "or" evaluation
Executing true_func
True result
```

If the first argument to an `and` operator evaluates to `False`, the second
argument is not evaluated.

```mojo
print('Short-circuit "and" evaluation')
if false_func() and true_func():
    print("True result")
```

```output
Short-circuit "and" evaluation
Executing false_func
```

### Conditional expressions

Mojo also supports conditional expressions (or what is sometimes called a
[*ternary conditional operator*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ternary_conditional_operator))
using the syntax<code><var>true_result</var> if <var>boolean_expression</var> else <var>false_result</var></code>, just as
in Python. This is most often used as a concise way to assign one of two
different values to a variable, based on a boolean condition.

```mojo
temp_celsius = 15
forecast = "warm" if temp_celsius > 20 else "cool"
print("The forecast for today is", forecast)
```

```output
The forecast for today is cool
```

The alternative, written as a multi-line `if` statement, is more verbose.

```mojo
if temp_celsius > 20:
    forecast = "warm"
else:
    forecast = "cool"
print("The forecast for today is", forecast)
```

```output
The forecast for today is cool
```

## The `while` statement

The `while` loop repeatedly executes a code block while a given boolean
expression evaluates to `True`. For example, the following loop prints values
from the Fibonacci series that are less than 50.

```mojo
fib_prev = 0
fib_curr = 1

print(fib_prev, end="")
while fib_curr < 50:
    print(",", fib_curr, end="")
    fib_prev, fib_curr = fib_curr, fib_prev + fib_curr
```

```output
0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34
```

A `continue` statement skips execution of the rest of the code block and
resumes with the loop test expression.

```mojo
n = 0
while n < 5:
    n += 1
    if n == 3:
        continue
    print(n, end=", ")
```

```output
1, 2, 4, 5,
```

A `break` statement terminates execution of the loop.

```mojo
n = 0
while n < 5:
    n += 1
    if n == 3:
        break
    print(n, end=", ")
```

```output
1, 2,
```

Optionally, a `while` loop can include an `else` clause. The body of the `else`
clause executes when the loop's boolean condition evaluates to `False`, even if
it occurs the first time tested.

```mojo
n = 5

while n < 4:
    print(n)
    n += 1
else:
    print("Loop completed")

```

```output
Loop completed
```

:::note

The `else` clause does *not* execute if a `break` or `return` statement
exits the `while` loop.

:::

```mojo
n = 0
while n < 5:
    n += 1
    if n == 3:
        break
    print(n)
else:
    print("Executing else clause")
```

```output
1
2
```

## The `for` statement

The `for` loop iterates over a sequence, executing a code block for each
element in the sequence.
The Mojo `for` loop can iterate over any type that implements an `__iter__()`
method that returns a type that defines `__next__()` and `__len__()` methods.

### Iterating over Mojo collections

All of the collection types in the [`collections`](/mojo/stdlib/collections)
module support `for` loop iteration. See the
[Collection types](/mojo/manual/types#collection-types) documentation for more
information on Mojo collection types.

:::

The following shows an example of iterating over a Mojo
[`List`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/list/List).

```mojo
from collections import List

states = [String("California"), "Hawaii", "Oregon"]
for state in states:
    print(state)
```

```output
California
Hawaii
Oregon
```

The same technique works for iterating over a Mojo
[`Set`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/set/Set).

```mojo
from collections import Set

values = {42, 0}
for item in values:
    print(item)
```

```output
42
0
```

There are two techniques for iterating over a Mojo
[`Dict`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/dict/Dict). The first is to iterate directly
using the `Dict`, which produces a sequence of the dictionary's keys.

```mojo
capitals: Dict[String, String] = {
    "California": "Sacramento",
    "Hawaii": "Honolulu",
    "Oregon": "Salem"
}

for state in capitals:
    print(capitals[state] + ", " + state)
```

```output
Sacramento, California
Honolulu, Hawaii
Salem, Oregon
```

The second approach to iterating over a Mojo `Dict` is to invoke its
[`items()`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/dict/Dict#items) method, which produces a
sequence of [`DictEntry`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/dict/DictEntry) objects.
Within the loop body, you can then access the `key` and `value` fields of the
entry.

```mojo
for item in capitals.items():
    print(item.value + ", " + item.key)
```

```output
Sacramento, California
Honolulu, Hawaii
Salem, Oregon
```

Another type of iterable provided by the Mojo standard library is a *range*,
which is a sequence of integers generated by the
[`range()`](/mojo/stdlib/builtin/range/range) function. It differs from the
collection types shown above in that it's implemented as a
[generator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generator_\(computer_programming\)),
producing each value as needed rather than materializing the entire sequence
in memory. Additionally, each value assigned to the loop index variable is
simply the `Int` value rather than a `Pointer` to the value, so you should
not use the dereference operator on it within the loop. For example:

```mojo
for i in range(5):
    print(i, end=", ")
```

```output
0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
```

### `for` loop control statements

A `continue` statement skips execution of the rest of the code block and
resumes the loop with the next element of the collection.

```mojo
for i in range(5):
    if i == 3:
        continue
    print(i, end=", ")
```

```output
0, 1, 2, 4,
```

A `break` statement terminates execution of the loop.

```mojo
for i in range(5):
    if i == 3:
        break
    print(i, end=", ")
```

```output
0, 1, 2,
```

Optionally, a `for` loop can include an `else` clause. The body of the `else`
clause executes after iterating over all of the elements in a collection.

```mojo
for i in range(5):
    print(i, end=", ")
else:
    print("\nFinished executing 'for' loop")
```

```output
0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
Finished executing 'for' loop
```

The `else` clause executes even if the collection is empty.

```mojo
from collections import List

empty = List[Int]()
for i in empty:
    print(i)
else:
    print("Finished executing 'for' loop")
```

```output
Finished executing 'for' loop
```

:::note

The `else` clause does *not* execute if a `break` or `return` statement
terminates the `for` loop.

:::

```mojo
from collections import List

animals = [String("cat"), "aardvark", "hippopotamus", "dog"]
for animal in animals:
    if animal == "dog":
        print("Found a dog")
        break
else:
    print("No dog found")
```

```output
Found a dog
```

### Iterating over Python collections

The Mojo `for` loop supports iterating over Python collection types. Each item
retrieved by the loop is a
[`PythonObject`](/mojo/stdlib/python/python_object/PythonObject) wrapper around
the Python object. Refer to the [Python types](/mojo/manual/python/types)
documentation for more information on manipulating Python objects from Mojo.

The following is a simple example of iterating over a mixed-type Python list.

```mojo
from python import Python

def main():
    # Create a mixed-type Python list
    py_list = Python.list(42, "cat", 3.14159)
    for py_obj in py_list:  # Each element is of type "PythonObject"
        print(py_obj)
```

```output
42
cat
3.14159
```

:::note TODO

Iterating over a Mojo collection currently assigns the loop index variable a
`Pointer` to each element, which then requires you to use the dereference
operator within the loop body. In contrast, iterating over a Python collection
assigns a `PythonObject` wrapper for the element, which does *not* require you
to use the dereference operator.

:::

There are two techniques for iterating over a Python dictionary. The first is to
iterate directly using the dictionary, which produces a sequence of its keys.

```mojo
from python import Python

def main():
    # Create a mixed-type Python dictionary
    py_dict = Python.evaluate("{'a': 1, 'b': 2.71828, 'c': 'sushi'}")
    for py_key in py_dict:  # Each key is of type "PythonObject"
        print(py_key, py_dict[py_key])
```

```output
a 1
b 2.71828
c sushi
```

The second approach to iterating over a Python dictionary is to invoke its
`items()` method, which produces a sequence of 2-tuple objects.
Within the loop body, you can then access the key and value by index.

```mojo
from python import Python

def main():
    # Create a mixed-type Python dictionary
    py_dict = Python.evaluate("{'a': 1, 'b': 2.71828, 'c': 'sushi'}")
    for py_tuple in py_dict.items():  # Each 2-tuple is of type "PythonObject"
        print(py_tuple[0], py_tuple[1])
```

```output
a 1
b 2.71828
c sushi
```

Commit message:

[Docs] Add more docs on reference bindings.
MODULAR_ORIG_COMMIT_REV_ID: 50b389e5eb013f2087cf1e6cf39838aca00956a8

mojo/docs/manual/control-flow.mdx, after:

---
title: Control flow
description: Mojo control flow statements.
---

Mojo includes several traditional control flow structures for conditional and
repeated execution of code blocks.

## The `if` statement

Mojo supports the `if` statement for conditional code execution. With it you can
conditionally execute an indented code block if a given
[boolean](/mojo/manual/types#booleans) expression evaluates to `True`.

```mojo
temp_celsius = 25
if temp_celsius > 20:
    print("It is warm.")
    print("The temperature is", temp_celsius * 9 / 5 + 32, "Fahrenheit." )
```

```output
It is warm.
The temperature is 77.0 Fahrenheit.
```

You can write the entire `if` statement as a single line if all you need to
execute conditionally is a single, short statement.

```mojo
temp_celsius = 22
if temp_celsius < 15: print("It is cool.") # Skipped because condition is False
if temp_celsius > 20: print("It is warm.")
```

```output
It is warm.
```

Optionally, an `if` statement can include any number of additional `elif`
clauses, each specifying a boolean condition and associated code block to
execute if `True`. The conditions are tested in the order given. When a
condition evaluates to `True`, the associated code block is executed and no
further conditions are tested.

Additionally, an `if` statement can include an optional `else` clause providing
a code block to execute if all conditions evaluate to `False`.

```mojo
temp_celsius = 25
if temp_celsius <= 0:
    print("It is freezing.")
elif temp_celsius < 20:
    print("It is cool.")
elif temp_celsius < 30:
    print("It is warm.")
else:
    print("It is hot.")
```

```output
It is warm.
```

:::note TODO

Mojo currently does not support the equivalent of a Python `match` or C `switch`
statement for pattern matching and conditional execution.

:::

### Short-circuit evaluation

Mojo follows [short-circuit evaluation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Short-circuit_evaluation)
semantics for boolean operators. If the first argument to an `or` operator
evaluates to `True`, the second argument is not evaluated.

```mojo
def true_func() -> Bool:
    print("Executing true_func")
    return True

def false_func() -> Bool:
    print("Executing false_func")
    return False

print('Short-circuit "or" evaluation')
if true_func() or false_func():
    print("True result")
```

```output
Short-circuit "or" evaluation
Executing true_func
True result
```

If the first argument to an `and` operator evaluates to `False`, the second
argument is not evaluated.

```mojo
print('Short-circuit "and" evaluation')
if false_func() and true_func():
    print("True result")
```

```output
Short-circuit "and" evaluation
Executing false_func
```

### Conditional expressions

Mojo also supports conditional expressions (or what is sometimes called a
[*ternary conditional operator*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ternary_conditional_operator))
using the syntax<code><var>true_result</var> if <var>boolean_expression</var> else <var>false_result</var></code>, just as
in Python. This is most often used as a concise way to assign one of two
different values to a variable, based on a boolean condition.

```mojo
temp_celsius = 15
forecast = "warm" if temp_celsius > 20 else "cool"
print("The forecast for today is", forecast)
```

```output
The forecast for today is cool
```

The alternative, written as a multi-line `if` statement, is more verbose.

```mojo
if temp_celsius > 20:
    forecast = "warm"
else:
    forecast = "cool"
print("The forecast for today is", forecast)
```

```output
The forecast for today is cool
```

## The `while` statement

The `while` loop repeatedly executes a code block while a given boolean
expression evaluates to `True`. For example, the following loop prints values
from the Fibonacci series that are less than 50.

```mojo
fib_prev = 0
fib_curr = 1

print(fib_prev, end="")
while fib_curr < 50:
    print(",", fib_curr, end="")
    fib_prev, fib_curr = fib_curr, fib_prev + fib_curr
```

```output
0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34
```

A `continue` statement skips execution of the rest of the code block and
resumes with the loop test expression.

```mojo
n = 0
while n < 5:
    n += 1
    if n == 3:
        continue
    print(n, end=", ")
```

```output
1, 2, 4, 5,
```

A `break` statement terminates execution of the loop.

```mojo
n = 0
while n < 5:
    n += 1
    if n == 3:
        break
    print(n, end=", ")
```

```output
1, 2,
```

Optionally, a `while` loop can include an `else` clause. The body of the `else`
clause executes when the loop's boolean condition evaluates to `False`, even if
it occurs the first time tested.

```mojo
n = 5

while n < 4:
    print(n)
    n += 1
else:
    print("Loop completed")

```

```output
Loop completed
```

:::note

The `else` clause does *not* execute if a `break` or `return` statement
exits the `while` loop.

:::

```mojo
n = 0
while n < 5:
    n += 1
    if n == 3:
        break
    print(n)
else:
    print("Executing else clause")
```

```output
1
2
```

## The `for` statement

The `for` loop iterates over a sequence, executing a code block for each
element in the sequence.
The Mojo `for` loop can iterate over any type that implements an `__iter__()`
method that returns a type that defines `__next__()` and `__len__()` methods.

### Iterating over Mojo collections

All of the collection types in the [`collections`](/mojo/stdlib/collections)
module support `for` loop iteration. See the
[Collection types](/mojo/manual/types#collection-types) documentation for more
information on Mojo collection types.

The following shows an example of iterating over a Mojo
[`List`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/list/List).

```mojo
from collections import List

states = [String("California"), "Hawaii", "Oregon"]
for state in states:
    print(state)
```

```output
California
Hawaii
Oregon
```

The same technique works for iterating over a Mojo
[`Set`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/set/Set).

```mojo
from collections import Set

values = {42, 0}
for item in values:
    print(item)
```

```output
42
0
```

There are two techniques for iterating over a Mojo
[`Dict`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/dict/Dict). The first is to iterate directly
using the `Dict`, which produces a sequence of the dictionary's keys.

```mojo
var capitals: Dict[String, String] = {
    "California": "Sacramento",
    "Hawaii": "Honolulu",
    "Oregon": "Salem"
}

for state in capitals:
    print(capitals[state] + ", " + state)
```

```output
Sacramento, California
Honolulu, Hawaii
Salem, Oregon
```

The second approach to iterating over a Mojo `Dict` is to invoke its
[`items()`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/dict/Dict#items) method, which produces a
sequence of [`DictEntry`](/mojo/stdlib/collections/dict/DictEntry) objects.
Within the loop body, you can then access the `key` and `value` fields of the
entry.

```mojo
for item in capitals.items():
    print(item.value + ", " + item.key)
```

```output
Sacramento, California
Honolulu, Hawaii
Salem, Oregon
```

#### Iterating using references

The Mojo collection iterators all return
[references](/mojo/manual/values/lifetimes#working-with-references), which
are copied into the loop variable. To avoid making a copy, add the `ref`
keyword in front of the loop variable to create a reference binding.

This can be useful if you want to mutate the value in the collection:

```mojo
var values = [1, 4, 7, 3, 6, 11]
for ref value in values:
    if value % 2 != 0:
        value -= 1
print(values.__str__())
```

```output
[0, 4, 6, 2, 6, 10]
```

### Iterating ranges

Another type of iterable provided by the Mojo standard library is a *range*,
which is a sequence of integers generated by the
[`range()`](/mojo/stdlib/builtin/range/range) function. It differs from the
collection types shown above in that it's implemented as a
[generator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generator_\(computer_programming\)),
producing each value as needed rather than materializing the entire sequence
in memory. For example:

```mojo
for i in range(5):
    print(i, end=", ")
```

```output
0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
```

### `for` loop control statements

A `continue` statement skips execution of the rest of the code block and
resumes the loop with the next element of the collection.

```mojo
for i in range(5):
    if i == 3:
        continue
    print(i, end=", ")
```

```output
0, 1, 2, 4,
```

A `break` statement terminates execution of the loop.

```mojo
for i in range(5):
    if i == 3:
        break
    print(i, end=", ")
```

```output
0, 1, 2,
```

Optionally, a `for` loop can include an `else` clause. The body of the `else`
clause executes after iterating over all of the elements in a collection.

```mojo
for i in range(5):
    print(i, end=", ")
else:
    print("\nFinished executing 'for' loop")
```

```output
0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
Finished executing 'for' loop
```

The `else` clause executes even if the collection is empty.

```mojo
from collections import List

empty = List[Int]()
for i in empty:
    print(i)
else:
    print("Finished executing 'for' loop")
```

```output
Finished executing 'for' loop
```

:::note

The `else` clause does *not* execute if a `break` or `return` statement
terminates the `for` loop.

:::

```mojo
from collections import List

animals = [String("cat"), "aardvark", "hippopotamus", "dog"]
for animal in animals:
    if animal == "dog":
        print("Found a dog")
        break
else:
    print("No dog found")
```

```output
Found a dog
```

### Iterating over Python collections

The Mojo `for` loop supports iterating over Python collection types. Each item
retrieved by the loop is a
[`PythonObject`](/mojo/stdlib/python/python_object/PythonObject) wrapper around
the Python object. Refer to the [Python types](/mojo/manual/python/types)
documentation for more information on manipulating Python objects from Mojo.

The following is a simple example of iterating over a mixed-type Python list.

```mojo
from python import Python

def main():
    # Create a mixed-type Python list
    py_list = Python.list(42, "cat", 3.14159)
    for py_obj in py_list:  # Each element is of type "PythonObject"
        print(py_obj)
```

```output
42
cat
3.14159
```

There are two techniques for iterating over a Python dictionary. The first is to
iterate directly using the dictionary, which produces a sequence of its keys.

```mojo
from python import Python

def main():
    # Create a mixed-type Python dictionary
    py_dict = Python.evaluate("{'a': 1, 'b': 2.71828, 'c': 'sushi'}")
    for py_key in py_dict:  # Each key is of type "PythonObject"
        print(py_key, py_dict[py_key])
```

```output
a 1
b 2.71828
c sushi
```

The second approach to iterating over a Python dictionary is to invoke its
`items()` method, which produces a sequence of 2-tuple objects.
Within the loop body, you can then access the key and value by index.

```mojo
from python import Python

def main():
    # Create a mixed-type Python dictionary
    py_dict = Python.evaluate("{'a': 1, 'b': 2.71828, 'c': 'sushi'}")
    for py_tuple in py_dict.items():  # Each 2-tuple is of type "PythonObject"
        print(py_tuple[0], py_tuple[1])
```

```output
a 1
b 2.71828
c sushi
```
